


viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ, rasa-varjaṁ raso ’py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate

Once a person, particularly the embodied soul consciously chooses to give up or refrain from the temporary pleasures and sensory gratifications that the material world offers.The usual allure or attraction that these sensory objects hold—what we might call their "pull"—gradually diminishes or "withdraws." This means that these objects no longer captivate the mind in the same way as before and even his taste for sensual pleasure ceases when he beholds the Supreme or have deeper understanding of life.

karmendriyāṇi sanyamya ya āste manasā smaran indriyārthān vimūḍhātmā mithyāchāraḥ sa ucyate

karmendriyāṇi organs of action (hands, legs, speech, etc.) sanyamya (controlled) ya āste manasā smaran indriyārthān sense objects (things the senses enjoy)
vimūḍhātmā (deluded soul, confused self) mithyāchāraḥ sa ucyate (is a hypocrite, pretender)

Our thoughts must align with our actions.

na tad bhāsayate sūryo na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama.

That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun, nor by the moon, nor by fire. Having gone there, one never returns. That is My supreme abode.


jātasya hi dhruvo mṛityur dhruvaṁ janma mṛitasya cha tasmād aparihārye ’rthe na tvaṁ śhochitum arhasi

Death is certain for one who has been born, and rebirth is inevitable for one who has died. Therefore, you should not lament over the inevitable

akīrtiṁ chāpi bhūtāni kathayiṣhyanti te ’vyayām sambhāvitasya chākīrtir maraṇād atirichyate

People will speak of your infamy forever. For a person who has been honored, dishonor is worse than death.
For a respectable person infamy is worse then death

acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca nityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur acalo ’yaṁ sanātanaḥ
the true self cannot be harmed by any physical means.

This soul is unbreakable, incombustible, insoluble, undryable; indeed, it is eternal, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and everlasting primordial

aśhochyān-anvaśhochas tvaṁ prajñā-vādānśh cha bhāṣhase gatāsūn-agatāsūnśh cha nānuśhochanti paṇḍitāḥ
You grieve for those who should not be grieved for, yet you speak words of wisdom. The truly wise lament neither for the living nor for the dead.

uttering high-sounding philosophy doesn’t make one truly wise

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate iti

I am the source of all; from Me everything emanates/proceeds

Karmaṇy-evādhikāras te mā phaleṣhu kadāchana > Mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr mā te saṅgo ’stvakarmaṇi

"You have a right only to perform your actions, > Never to the fruits (results) thereof. 
> Do not let the fruits of action be your motive, > Nor let your attachment be to inaction."